Ghidra

This product includes software developed at the National Security Agency
(https://www.nsa.gov)

Portions of this product were created by the U.S. Government and not subject to
U.S. copyright protections under 17 U.S.C.

The remaining portions are copyright their respective authors and have been
contributed under the terms of one or more open source licenses and made
available to you under the terms of those licenses. (See LICENSE)

Licensing Intent

The intent is that this software and documentation ("Project") should be treated
as if it is licensed under the license associated with the Project ("License")
in the LICENSE file. However, because we are part of the United States (U.S.)
Federal Government, it is not that simple.

The portions of this Project written by U.S. Federal Government employees within
the scope of their federal employment are ineligible for copyright protection in
the U.S.; this is generally understood to mean that these portions of the
Project are placed in the public domain.

In countries where copyright protection is available (which does not include the
U.S.), contributions made by U.S. Federal Government employees are released
under the License. Merged contributions from private contributors are released
under the License.

The Ghidra software is released under the Apache License, Version 2.0
("Apache 2.0").

In addition, each module may contain numerous 3rd party components (libraries,
icons, etc.) that each have their own license, which is compatible with Apache
2.0. Each module has a LICENSE.txt file that lists each license used in that
module and the 3rd party files that fall under that license. The license files
for each license used by Ghidra can be found in the licenses directory at the
installation root.

Also, in the GPL directory, there are several stand-alone support programs that
are released using the GPL 3 license. Ghidra executes these programs as needed
and parses the output to get the desired results. There is a licenses directory
under the GPL directory that has the GPL license files.

Consistent with the inbound=outbound model, contributions to any module must be
made available by the contributor under the applicable license(s). Please read
the Legal section of the CONTRIBUTING.md guide.
